---
layout: post
title:  "SystemC基础"
date:   2024-02-15 20:47:07 +0000
categories: jekyll
tags: hardware
---

# SystemC基础

> SystemC is a C++ class library built on top of ANSI C++ that allows a designer to create cycle-accurate models of system-level designs including software algorithms, hardware architectures, and their interfaces: transforming standard C/C++ to a system descriptor language (SDL). Designers create an executable specification, which is a C++ program that exhibits the same behavior as the system being studied, enabling its simulation, validation, optimization, and easy exploration of design space. SystemC provides three crucial constructs that are missing in standard ANSI C/C++. That is time, concurrency, and reactive behavior, essential for accurate hardware modeling and analysis.

> SystemC prevents manual translation of a C/C++ model into the Verilog/VHDL RTL model, thereby curtailing translation errors. A SystemC description of a system is a set of processing elements (PE)/modules that exchange data among each other via bi/unidirectional channels. The library provides a number of built-in communication channel classes (sc_buffer, sc_fifo, etc.,), and in addition, the user can design one's own custom channel.

SystemC只是基于C++的一个类库，它为周期精准建模提供重要支撑：时间、并发、响应式。SystemC在经过验证之后可以经过HLS直接转换为Verilog/VHDL，避免手工转发引入的错误。SystemC的基本模型结构是一组PE及其互相交换数据的channel。


## Main Language Constructs

SystemC核心概念及其列表如下：

* **Module** Container class, hierarchical, can contain other modules：SystemC ‘sc_module’

* **Process** The core functionality of any modules is contained in its processes, which are C++ methods. A module can have any number of three possible process types

* **Port** A module sends/receives data to/from other modules via ports， could be (uni)/(bi)directional: SystemC ‘sc_port’ or ‘sc_export’

* **Signal** Could be resolved or unresolved, a resolved signal may have multiple drivers (bus), whereas an unresolved signal has a single driver. Single-, two-/four-valued signals are allowed. A four-valued signal is a logic signal with allowed values of ‘true’, ‘false’, ‘don’t care’, and ‘high impedance’

* **Clock** Special signals, multiple clocks with arbitrary phase relationships are allowed

* **Sensitivity list** The sensitivity of a process is the set of events or timeouts which trigger that process. A process is sensitive to an event if that event has been added to its static sensitivity list or dynamic sensitivity of the process instance. Static sensitivity of an unspawned process is fixed during elaboration, while that of a spawned process is set when sc_spawn is invoked. A timeout occurs when a given time interval has elapsed.

类比Verilog/VHDL，Module/Port/Signal/敏感列表等概念一致，C++是通用目的的编程语言，代码是一行一行执行的，Verilog/VHDL包含很多并发赋值等并发结构，SystemC提供了Process来表示并发结构。

### scheduler

> The execution of a SystemC application consists of elaboration, followed
by simulation.

* **Elaboration** consisting of creation of the application’s module hierarchy (including module primitive channels and processes), associated data structures, binding of ports and exports, execution of shell of public implementation, and the private kernel of the implementation.

* **Simulation** consists of execution of the scheduler part of the kernel which in turn invokes the processes of the application.

SystemC应用的执行包含两步：实例化并绑定模块之间交换数据的端口；通过调度器调度每个模块的process。

> SystemC provides a reactive, event-driven simulation infrastructure that supports two types of processes: spawned and unspawned. An unspawned process instance is created by invoking one of three process macros: SC_CTHREAD, SC_METHOD, and SC_THREAD (most widely used). Each of these is elaborated, unlike spawned processes, allowing efficient resource allocation at compile time. These three macros may be invoked from the constructor of a module, with an appropriate sensitivity list. A sensitivity list is tied to the core concept of an event-driven simulator: a process reacts/responds to an event, e.g., change in value of a signal. Thus, the SC_CTHREAD macro requires the rising or falling edge of any clock. The SC_THREAD macro is more flexible and robust, as it allows a general sensitivity list that may include a clock, allowing the corresponding process to respond to change in value at all ports of its container module specified in its sensitivity list. That is, if process p of module M is declared using the SC_THREAD macro in the constructor of M to be sensitized to ports portA and portB of M, then p will respond to any changes in values being read in through portA or portB or both. A SC_METHOD macro is executed each time its container module is activated and cannot be suspended with a wait statement (unlike SC_CTHREAD and SC_THREAD). On the contrary, both SC_CTHREAD and SC_THREAD macros are executed once. As a result, the code for any process declared as an SC_CTHREAD/SC_THREAD has an infinite loop in it, so that once invoked, the process waits for events in its sensitivity list and execution stops only when the container module is destroyed at the end of simulation. A spawned process may be created by invoking the built-in function sc_spawn during elaboration or simulation and may be used in fork–join parallel execution constructs. It must be noted that fork–join constructs exist strictly in the software realm and do not represent any physical hardware

SystemC提供了一个响应式事件驱动的基础设置，支持两种类型的process：spawned和unspawned。
1. `spawned process`通过`sc_spawn`提交到线程池执行，不表示任何物理硬件，不可综合

2. `unspawned process`又分为3种类型

    1. `SC_CTHREAD`的敏感列表是边缘触发的clock，类似`always_ff(SystemVerilog)`，用于表示时序电路的行为，可综合，程序开始时触发一次，然后开始无限循环，遇到`wait()`语句将控制器转交给调度器，执行时可保存状态。

    2. `SC_THREAD`支持通用的敏感列表，类似`always(Verilog)/process(VHDL)`，可以表示时序电路或组合电路，太过于灵活以致于不可综合，程序开始时触发一次，然后开始无限循环，遇到`wait()`语句将控制器转交给调度器，执行时可保存状态。

    3. `SC_METHOD`不可包含`wait()`语句，用于表示组合逻辑，可综合，每次被敏感列表触发后执行完毕才会返回调度器。

基于`SC_METHOD`实现DFF示例如下：

```C++
#include "systemc.h" 

SC_MODULE(dff) {
    sc_in<bool> clk;
    sc_in<bool> din;
    sc_out<bool> dout;

    void func() {
        dout.write(din.read());
    }

    SC_CTOR(dff) {
        // 每次敏感列表触发都会执行func
        SC_METHOD(func);
        sensitive << clk.pos();
    }
};
```

基于`SC_CTHREAD`实现DFF示例如下：

```C++
#include "systemc.h" 

SC_MODULE(dff) {
    sc_in<bool> clk;
    sc_in<bool> din;
    sc_out<bool> dout;

    void func() {
        while(true) { // forever
            // wait等待敏感列表触发
            wait();
            dout.write(din.read());
        }
    }

    SC_CTOR(dff) {
        // func只执行一次
        SC_CTHREAD(func);
        sensitive << clk.pos();
    }
};
```

> Satisfying the core SystemC execution model, ports are essential component of any SystemC module. A port may be bound to a channel, another port or export. An export may be bound to a channel, or an export, but never to a port. A port may be bound to a channel, but not vice versa. A port/export may be bound by name/position, but never simultaneously by both. Relevant methods of built-in SystemC classes `sc_module`, `sc_port`, or `sc_export` may be used for the actual binding process. Port binding is flexible: port A may be bound to port B, which in turn may be bound to channel C, effectively binding port A to channel C. All port binding occurs only during elaboration, but may be deferred till the end of elaboration (e.g., port A is bound to port B, but port B is not yet bound). However, all exports have to be bound immediately. Additionally, a port may be bound to multiple channels/ports. 

端口绑定

> The SystemC scheduler can execute a process only if one of the following conditions is satisfied. 

* Process instance has been made runnable during initialization.
* `sc_spawn` has been invoked during simulation.
* A process has been sensitized to an event and that event has occurred.
* A timeout has occurred.


### Data Types

> One of the main strengths of SystemC is that it has its own hardwarecentric data types. These allow to model any data type that you can encounter in a traditional HDL and also additional ones like fixed-point data types. Because these data types are mainly declared as templates in C++, they can be compiled by any C++ program and hence, accuracy analysis e.g., when doing data type quantization from floating-point to fixed-point data types can be easily and quickly done at the software level.


端口模式如下：

| Port type | Description |
| - | - |
sc_in | Inputs
sc_out | Outputs
sc_inout | Bi-directional port

数据类型如下：

| Data type | Description |
| - | - |
sc_bit  | 1-bit, uses native C++ bool type (fast)
sc_bv   | Bit-vector, faster in simulation than sc_lv
sc_logic | 1-bit, only supports X,Z,0,1
sc_lv   | Bit-vector, only supports X,Z,0,1
sc_int  | signed integer from 1 to 64-bits
sc_uint | unsigned integer from 1 to 64-bits
sc_bigint | Arbitrary size signed integer (slow)
sc_biguint | Arbitrary size unsigned integer (slow)
sc_fixed | Templated signed fixed-point
sc_ufixed | Templated unsigned fixed-point
sc_fix  | Untemplate fixed fixed-point
sc_ufix | Untemplated unsigned fixed-point


> It is recommended to use port methods to read and wrote from the IOs instead of simply assigning values to the ports. For this SystemC provides two method: read() and write().

| Syntax | Description |
| - | - |
inport = 1  | Not recommended
inport.read() | Recommended
outport = 0xFF  | Not recommended
outport.write(0xFF) | Recommended


## Modeling Combinational Logic Circuits

### 1-bit full-adder

> A simple 3-bit input adder with sum and carry bit output is presented. Given three input bits b0, b1, b2, carry-out bit is obtained via the logical operation :(b0 and b1) or (b0 and b2) or (b1 and b2) and the sum bit is generated as: (b0 xor b1 xor b2), One of the input bits is the carry-out bit from the previous stage.

```c++
#include <systemc>

SC_MODULE(full_adder)
{
    // 定义输入输出端口
    sc_in<bool> in0;
    sc_in<bool> in1;
    sc_in<bool> in2;
    sc_out<bool> carry;
    sc_out<bool> sum;

    // 定义变量
    bool lib;
    bool b0;
    bool b1;
    bool b2;
    bool b3;
    bool b4;

    void add_proc0() 
    {
        while(1)
        {
            wait();

            if (lib == true) 
            {
                b0 = in0.read();
                b1 = in1.read();
                b2 = in2.read();

                b3 = ((b0 & b1) | (b0 & b2) | (b1 & b2));
                b4 = (b0 ^ b1 ^ b2);

                carry.write(b3);
                sum.write(b4);
            }
        }
    }

    SC_CTOR(full_adder)
    {
        SC_THREAD(add_proc0);
        sensitive << in0 << in1 << in2;
    }

    ~full_adder()
    {

    }
}
```

### 2-4 decoder

```c++
#include <systemc>

SC_MODULE(decoder)
{
    // 定义输入输出端口
    sc_in< sc_lv<2> > in;
    sc_out< sc_lv<4> > out;

    // 定义变量
    sc_lv<2> inlv;
    sc_lv<4> outlv;

    void decoder_proc0() 
    {
        while(1)
        {
            wait();

            inlv = in.read();

            if (inlv == "00") outlv = "1000";
            else if (inlv == "01") outlv = "0100";
            else if (inlv == "10") outlv = "0010";
            else if (inlv == "11") outlv = "0001";
            else outlv = "ZZZZ";

            out.write(outlv);
        }
    }

    SC_CTOR(decoder) : inlv("ZZ"), outlv("ZZZZ")
    {
        SC_THREAD(decoder_proc0);
        sensitive << in;
    }

    ~decoder()
    {

    }
}
```


## Modeling Sequential Logic Circuits




## Hierarchical System Design